Speak to some of the more technical
aspects of this matter.
Alright, well look, I'm, I'm Greg O'Connor, the chair
of the committee, and we have on my right, uh, Greg Flemming
for Mango here in uh, Alton.
Um, I am Pao Garcia off to the right of the screen.
Um, MP for Newly
And Kda. I'm Ka
Carter.
Um, green Party List MP based in Christchurch.
Alright, welcome.
Um, Tata, I got that right, Tata, that's the pronunciation.
Good. Um, now 10 minutes, uh, take your submissions read,
but we're keen to hear from, uh, any additional, um,
submissions on points
and hopefully leave time for questions.
Okay, thank you.
So Koto Koto, uh, thank you for the opportunity
to speak, uh, to this important, uh, petition Co.
Phillip Shackleton ua.
Uh, I'm the principal advisor of Sector Readiness at t
I'm joined today by Raymond Horan, who is our chief advisor
and also line with us is Lionel Bridger, who is the manager,
animal Services from Christchurch City Council.
And Billy Charlton, who's the Environment
Services Manager from Wey Mac Area District Council.
First, we want to acknowledge the seriousness of dog attacks
and the lasting impact they have on victims,
families and communities.
We also acknowledge the petitioner's commitment
to improving public safety and victim support.
We'd like to highlight three points from our submission.
Firstly, councils under the Dog Control Act 1996
operate within strict legal boundaries.
Dogs are legally considered property
and euthanasia of a dog generally requires a court order.
Every decision to prosecute following a dog attack must meet
evidentiary standards
and follow the solicitor general's pro
prosecution guidelines.
For example, in the Y Macari case,
the council applied the legal requirements under the act.
The council classified the dog as dangerous under section 31
and under section 32 the dog was required to be muted
with conditions imposed on the owner
that removed any further risk to the public.
As a result, the dog has not reoffended.
Secondly, we do not support a mandatory national dog bite
scale under the Dog Control Act 1996.
While tools like the Dunbar Scale can help
mandating one risks limiting enforcement discretion,
councils need the ability
to investigate dog attacks on a case by case basis.
And this allows councils to
take into consideration broad factors such
as the dog's history, compliance, record,
and community risk.
And thirdly, the DO Control Act is nearly 30 years old.
The current system is generally fit for purpose,
but we believe a review would be beneficial.
We support a sector-wide consultation
before any legislative changes.
We do not support penalties for councils.
These could undermine discretion
and lead to risk averse enforcement
instead will be back DIA's approach
of strengthening community consultation for bylaws.
Looking ahead, we recently attended the launch
of the New Zealand Animal Law Association's report on dog
attacks, which opens a valuable con conversation
about updating the act.
DIA has already started reviewing enforcement guidelines
and we've helped circulate their survey
to animal control managers
to ensure wide engagement across the sector.
In short, public safety matters,
enforcement must remain fair
and legally sound collaboration is key
to any future changes.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak.
We are happy to take any questions
and our colleagues online can provide further detail.
Alright, thank you very much.
Uh, questions, uh, members is
No, I found the, uh, both the written
and the oral submission Comprehensive Mr.
Chair.
Um, so the, the downside to a national policy,
um, would essentially what I'm hearing you say is
that it would be, it has got to potential to be un less fair
to all parties, um, by taking away the,
really taking away the discretion.
Is that that would summarize your position.
Yes. But I would like, uh, to offer the opportunity
for Lionel Bridger to make a comment.
Mr. Bridger. No,
we need to, uh, push a button somewhere to get rid of
that little red.next to your name, which indicates that.
Yeah, yeah. There we
Go. Um, thank
you very much for the opportunity.
Um, the introduction of a mandatory, um,
scale in in respect of dog bites, similar to what Dr.
Um, Dunbar has put forward.
Uh, we have the opinion that we need to assess
the history of the dog in relation to aggressive behavior
and our experience.
The majority of dog bites, um, are deescalated
through human inter intervention.
Uh, people get involved
and they stop the dogs from fighting resulting in
injuries that would be considered on levels one
to three on a scale
because the, um, people
intervened and mitigated any serious injuries.
However, that dog has demonstrated a potentially
to be aggressive.
Um, we must have the ability to apply
the classifications of dogs
as menacing requiring muzzling in public place.
And we also need to have the ability to continue
to classify dogs as dangerous, which places
additional responsibility on the owners.
Um, we also have the view
that in whether a dog is demonstrated, um, a history
of aggressive behavior, um, we must be able
to prosecute those owners
who demonstrate there's no willingness to comply
with the provisions of the act.
Um, and we've recently had a pro successful prosecution in
Christchurch where the substantive dog attack
on a domestic animal was relatively minor,
but the dog had a significant history
of demonstrating aggressive behavior.
And if we had applied, uh, scale similar to Dr.
Dunbar, that would've limited our ability to
actually initiate a prosecution, um,
where this dog posed a significant public safety risk.
Mm-hmm.
Alright, Um, Kara,
Just quickly, hello.
Thank you for that. Um, this is standard practice for, um,
victims to have, um, support like, uh,
suggested like a helpline and things like that.
Um, we actively engage
with victim support, uh, early on.
We make that readily available.
Um, we, as part of our investigative process, we also,
uh, obtain victim impact statements,
which we make available.
Um, a victim help line, um, is always a good, uh,
a good idea to establish.
Alright, well that's fairly incisive, which, uh, all our
submissions required as, uh, well prepared and size as that.
So, uh, thank you very much. Thank you. Very useful. Thanks.
A
Well done guys.
Great work. Thank you both.
Enjoy the long weekend. Nice work, Lionel. Beautiful.
Thank you.